One of the biggest hurdles to overcome when getting into steelheading is picking out the right tools for the job. This is especially true if you are coming from spin fishing where your rods are easily labeled from light to heavy, and moderate to fast. Then you decide to get your first fly rod and you are hit with terms like 1-12 weight (power of the rod, or weight of the line), weight-forward (a specific fly line taper), tippet (fancy term for "even more leader"), and strike indicators (an advanced air filled spherical device built to sense underwater activity... also known as "a bobber"). Fly fishing can be thought of as an over-complicated form of spin fishing, so it is only fitting that the terminology is equally as complex.

Everyone has their own ideas on their favorite brands and styles of fishing gear, but for the most part, the equipment used by 90% of anglers on the north and south shore is all quite similar. In this article I'll go over rods, reels, line, flies, indicators, nets, and the rest of the gear you should have if you are getting into steelheading, upgrading your current gear, or are looking for a gift for the steelheader in your family!

**Rod

The most popular rod for fishing steelhead on the tributaries of Lake Superior is a 7wt or 8wt fast action fly rod. When I first got into fly fishing, I heard that a 5wt is the most versatile fly fishing rod, but didn't realize that they meant for trout and not necessarily for steelhead. You can land steelhead with a standard 5wt fly rod, but it is not easy and is typically not good for the fish to fight it for as long as it takes on such a light rod. On the other hand, a 10wt rod has enough backbone to pull in a hard fighting steelhead, but when the water clears up you will want to lighten up your line and downsize your hooks, and using a heavy rod is not as forgiving on light tippet.

Fly rods are most commonly found in a 9' length. These rods are long enough to allow for mending your line on the water but short enough to fish smaller sections of rivers. I started with a 9' and recently switched to a 10'. The extra length makes it slightly more tip heavy, but it allows for better mends and easier high-sticking.

Most fishermen don't only fish for one species, and it is not necessary to have a different rod for each one. If you want a rod that will allow you to throw streamers for bass and pike as well as steelhead you may want to get a 9' 8wt. Although, if you mainly fish for steelhead and want an ideal rod for nymphing and possibly swinging flies on the north and south shore tributaries I would highly recommend a 7wt 10' or even a 7wt 11' switch rod.

You don't necessarily need an expensive rod for steelheading since you are typically fishing in smaller waters and don't need to rely on delicate, highly accurate casts. A more expensive rod will have higher quality components, will often be lighter, and often have a better warranty. If you are near or are visiting Duluth, the Great Lakes Fly Shop currently has some great rods from Echo and Scott.

**Reel

Simply pair your reel size to your rod weight or go up a size. Most fly reels come in a 5/6, 7/8, or 9/10 size corresponding to the line weight they hold. 7/8 reels are the most common depending on the size of fly line you are using, but larger reels will take in line faster and can balance out a longer rod better.

Make sure the reel you choose has a good drag system. Steelhead will rip line from your reel and can sometimes get caught in the current and you'll have no choice but to chase them down. Use the money you saved on a rod to buy a nice reel. I have been using a Redington Behemoth 7/8 Reel and it is a fantastic reel, offering a large arbor and extremely smooth drag with a large drag dial. A few other good options are the Echo Ion, or the and Waterworks Lamson Liquid.

**Line

Choosing the right line can be one of the most complicated decisions when outfitting your rod/reel.  There are dozens of brands and each one has hundreds of different combinations of weights, tapers, and buoyancies meant for highly specialized styles of fly-fishing. If you are just getting started in steelheading then getting a weight-forward floating line is going to be your most versatile option. These lines are usually labeled as WF8F (for a Weight Forward 8wt Floating line). There are many lines that are specific for nymphing or indicator fishing that are great options. Just match the line weight to your rod. If your rod is longer than 9ft, consider going up a size with your line. The extra line weight helps throw bulky indicator rigs as well as heavy streamers, which are the most common ways to fish for steelhead.

You will also need backing when using fly line. Backing fills up your reel so that your fly line can be wound in faster, and it also allows a fish to strip more line from reel than just your fly line. 20 to 30 lb backing is ideal. Although steelhead likely won't take you into your backing, it is not worth the risk.

Similar to the somewhat confusing weight system given to rods and line, tippet (the lightweight line at the end of your leader that you tie to your fly) is measured by its diameter instead of its breaking strength. If you buy a tapered steelheading leader it will be labeled by its length and X rating that corresponds to a specific diameter. That diameter of fly line typically falls within a range of breaking strength. A 9ft 0x  tapered nylon leader has roughly 15lbs of breaking strength at the tip and will work great for many different applications. I prefer to build my own leaders for steelheading that consist of 6ft of 20lb mono and 3ft of 15lb fluorocarbon. I tie on a small barrel swivel or tippet ring then tie on tippet depending on water depth and clarity. The tippet length and size I use can vary greatly depending on water clarity, depth, and speed. Generally 2-3ft of 1x-4x (6-12lb) fluorocarbon to my point fly, and if I can use a dropper fly, I will tie on roughly 2ft of tippet from the hook bend of my point fly. Remember to use lighter tippet on your dropper fly so that if your bottom fly gets snagged on the bottom you won't lose both flies.

*Remember that you can only use one fly on the North Shore of Lake Superior.

**Flies

Compared to trout fishing, selecting flies for steelhead is somewhat simpler since Steelhead aren't in the rivers as long as trout, there aren't as many hatches that you need to match your flies to. Primarily steelhead are eating eggs, nymphs, and stoneflies. So load up a box with any combination of glo-bugs, beads, pheasant tails, hare's ears, frenchies, stoneflies, x-legs, wooly buggers, or really anything that looks like an egg or a bug. I prefer using bright eggs and dark "buggy" nymphs in sizes 6 to 12.

Other than flies, you'll need two things to nymph effectively. The first is a strike indicator. I have bought every size and style of strike indicator, but I currently I have narrowed it down to two, Airflo Airlock strike indicators (3/4", 1"), and Thill ice/fly bobbers. Airlocks are durable, easy to see, easy to adjust depth, and easy to change between sizes and colors. The only cons are that they are relatively heavy making them harder to roll cast than other strike indicators. Thill bobbers are colored a two-tone color of bright orange and bright chartreuse. This can be extremely helpful when nymphing because the bobber will lay on its side until your weight and nymph are pulling straight down. This way you can tell exactly when you are fishing the correct depth. The main downside is that you need to string your leader through them, which makes it more difficult to change out to a different size or style of indicator. They are also not as durable as a Thingamabobbers or Airlocks.

The second piece of equipment you'll need is an assortment of split shot. I use #B, #BB, #7, and #5 round split shot depending on the water depth and speed, as well as the type of technique you are using. I like to leave the tag end on my knot connecting my leader to my tippet and add split shot onto the tag end instead of the leader. That way you won’t accidentally create a weak point in your line from crimping on split shot.

[Split_Shot_Tag_End picture]

**Everything Else

That's everything you need to actually catch a steelhead, but if you are completely new to fly fishing you will need a few more things to stay dry, land more fish, and release them quickly and healthy. These basics include waders/boots, a pack, a net, as well as nippers, and hemostats, as well as a fishing license and trout stamp. Just make sure your boots are grippy, your shades are polarized, your hooks are sharp, and your net is big enough to land a giant. Now go catch some steel!

**Rigging Pro-Tip

Pre-rig your dual flies on a lindy rig holder. If you want to change both flies quickly or you break off both flies you won't lose precious fishing time re-tying flies. Try a loop to loop connection or use a no-knot fast snap to quickly snap onto a tippet ring at the end of your leader.

[Dual_Flies_Lindy_Rig picture]
